# Review Question 4

> List six access technologies. Classify each one as home access, enterprise access, or wide-area wireless access.

## Access network

An access network is a type of network which physically connects an end system to the immediate router (also known as edge router) on a path from the end system to any other distant edge system. Examples of access networks are ISP, home networks, enterprise networks, ADSL, mobile networks, FITH etc.

## Types of access networks

### Ethernet

Ethernet is a family of wired computer networking technologies commonly used in local area networks (LAN), metropolitan area networks (MAN), and wide area networks (WAN). It was first standardized in 1983 as IEEE 802.3. Ethernet has since been refined to support higher bit rates, a greater number of nodes, and longer link distances, but retains much backward compatibility. Over time, ethernet has largely replaced competing wired LAN technologies such as Token Ring, FDDI, and ARCNET.

The original 10BASE5 ethernet used coaxial cable as a shared medium, while the newer ethernet variants use twisted pair cables and fibre optic links in conjunction with switches. Over the course of its history, ethernet data transfer rates have been increased from the original 2.94 Mbit/s to the latest 400 Gbit/s, with rates upto 1.6 Tbit/s under development. The ethernet standards include several wiring and signaling variants of the OSI physical layer.

Systems communicating over ethernet divide a stream of data into shorter pieces called frames. Each frame contains source and destination addresses, and error-checking data so that damaged frame can be detected and discarded; most often, higher-level protocols trigger retransmission of lost frames. Per the OSI model, ethernet provides services upto and including the data link layer. The 48 bit MAC address was adopted by IEEE 802 networking standards, including IEEE 802.11 (Wi-Fi), as well as FDDI.

Ethernet is widely used in homes and industries, and interworks well with wireless Wi-Fi technologies. The internet protocol is commonly carried over ethernet and so it is considered one of the key technologies that make up the internet. Ethernet is therefore, classifed as home access and enterprise access.

### DSL

Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) is a family of technologies that are used to transmit digital data over telephone lines. In telecommunication marketing, the term DSL is widely understood to mean asymmetrical digital subscriber line (ADSL), the most commonly installed DSL technology, for internet access.

DSL service can be delivered simultaneously with wired telephone service on the same telephone line since DSL uses higher frequency bands for data. On the customer premises, a DSL filter on each non-DSL outlet blocks any high frequency interference to enable simultaneous use of the voice and DSL services.

The bitrate of consumer DSL services typically range from 256 Kbit/s to over 100 Mbit/s in the direction to the customer (downstream), depending on the DSL technology, line conditions, and service-level implementation. Bit rates of 1 Gbit/s have been reached.

In ADSL, the data throughput in the upstream direction (the direction to the service provider) is lower, hence, the designation of asymmetric service. In symmetric digital subscriber line (SDSL) services, the downstream and upstream data rates are equal.

DSL technology can be classified as home access. It cannot be used in wide-area wireless access due to the fact that it is designed for short distances from 5 to 10 miles. Due to its low data transfer rates, it is not suitable for enterprise access.

### Cable

In telecommunications, cable internet access, shortened to cable internet, is a form of broadband internet access which uses the same infrastructure as a cable television. Like digital subscriber line (DSL) and fibre to the premises, cable internet access provides network edge connectivity (last mile access) from the internet service provider to an end user. It is integrated into the cable television infrastructure analogously to DSL which uses the existing telephone network. Cable TV networks and telecommunications networks are the predominant forms of residential internet access.

As with DSL, access is typically asymmetric, with the downstream channel typically allocated a higher transmission rate than the upstream channel. However, both of these rates are significantly higher than the corresponding rates in DSL. As in the case of DSL networks, the maximum achievable rate may not be realized due to lower contracted data rates or media impairments. Cable internet access, similar to DSL, is a home access network.

### FTTH/FTTB/FTTC/FTTN

Fibre to the X (FTTX) or fibre in the loop, is a generic term for any broadband network architecture using optical fiber to provide all or part of the local loop used for last mile telecommunication. As fibre optic cables are able to carry much more data than copper cables, especially over long distances, copper telephone networks built in 20th century are being replaced by fiber.

FTTX is a generalization for several configurations of fibre deployment, arranged in two groups: FTTP/FTTH/FTTB (fibre laid all the way to the premises/home/building) and FTTC/N (fibre laid to the cabinet/node, with copper wires completing the connection). Fibre as such is both a home access and enterprise access network.

### Wi-Fi

Wi-Fi or WiFi is a family of wireless network protocols, based on the IEEE 802.11 family of standards, which are commonly used for local area networking of devices and internet access, allowing nearby devices to exchange data by radio waves. IEEE 802.11 is part of the IEEE 802 set of local area network (LAN) technical standards, and specifies the set of media access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) protocols for implementing wireless local area networks (WLAN) computer communication.

WiFi most commonly uses the 2.4 gigahertz (120 mm) UHF and 5 gigahertz (60 mm) SHF radio bands; these bands are subdivided into multiple channels. Channels can be shared between networks but only one transmitter can locally transmit on a channel at any moment in time. WiFi as such classify as both home access and enterprise access network.

### 3G/4G/LTE

3G/4G/LTE are wireless mobile telecommunications technologies. These are all classified as wide area networks (WAN).